---
title: 'Details of Persuasive Legal Writing: Choosing “And” or “But”'
author: Jill Maxwell
type: post
date: 2011-10-12
url: /2011/10/and-but/
categories:
  - nuts and bolts
---
<p style="text-align: left;">
  In the midst of writing a bench memo, I wrote the following sentence (which I have since completely changed) and struggled about whether I should use &#8220;and&#8221; or &#8221;but&#8221;:
</p>

<p style="text-align: justify; padding-left: 60px;">
  &#8220;In <em>Sum</em>, the issue before the Ninth Circuit was whether the petitioner, who was admitted into the United States at a point of entry as a lawful permanent resident <strong>and</strong> was only admitted as such because he misrepresented his status, was eligible to apply for a § 212(h) waiver.&#8221;
</p>

It occurred to me that I often have a debate with myself over the proper use of and/but.   There are clear times when &#8220;and&#8221; is more appropriate, (but/and) there are clear times with &#8220;but&#8221; is more appropriate.  When either one might work, it seems like my default is to use &#8220;but&#8221; without much thinking.  But this choice deserves more attention because these words subtly communicate inclusion and exclusion.

&#8220;And&#8221; and &#8220;but&#8221; are conjunctions, meaning they link two clauses of a single sentence.  Using &#8220;but&#8221; in some way negates or undermines the preceding clause in favor of the succeeding one. By contrast, &#8220;and&#8221; tends to convey the existence of both clauses together.

When I chose to use &#8220;and&#8221; in the above sentence, I did so because the Court ultimately concluded that the petitioner was &#8220;admitted&#8221; as defined by the statute despite the fact that the admission was substantively unlawful (as he has misrepresented his status at the time of admission). Using &#8220;and&#8221; is consistent with the Court&#8217;s holding that the term &#8220;admitted&#8221; can include substantively unlawful admissions and more accurately summarizes the decision. It also subtly leads the reader to the Court&#8217;s conclusion. Had I used &#8220;but,&#8221; it would have negated the portion of the sentence that refers to lawful admission.

Although this example is one where I was simply trying to most accurately summarize judicial precedent, it is easy to imagine how using &#8220;and&#8221; or &#8220;but&#8221; can subtly persuade.  The petitioner in _Sum_, for example, who was arguing that his substantively unlawful admission was not an &#8220;admission&#8221; as defined by the statute, would be best served by using &#8220;but.&#8221; For example,

<p style="text-align: justify; padding-left: 60px;">
  &#8220;Petitioner was admitted into the United States at a point of entry as a lawful permanent resident, <strong>but</strong> was only admitted as such because he misrepresented his status.&#8221;
</p>

Using &#8220;but&#8221; calls into question whether the petitioner was &#8220;admitted&#8221; as defined by the statute.  Conversely, the government would have been best served by using &#8220;and.&#8221; Both are proper recitations of the facts, but they subtly convey different meanings.

&nbsp;
